Педіатрія2
A 40-year-old woman on examination presents with intensiﬁed basal metabolic rate. What hormone present in excess leads to such condition?
Triiodothyronine
Thyrocalcitonin
C. Glucagon
Aldosterone
Somatostatin
Autopsy of a woman revealed the following morphologic changes: stenosis of the atrioventricular opening, mitral insufﬁciency. Histologically there are focal cardiosclerosis and ”blooming” Aschoff nodules in the myocardium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Rheumatism
Scleroderma
Dermatomyositis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Systemic lupus erythematosus
After a case of sepsis a 27-year-old woman developed ”bronzed” skin discoloration characteristic of Addison’s disease. Hyperpigmentation mechanism in this case is based on increased secretion of:
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone
Somatotropin
Gonadotropin
β-lipotropin
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
A 16-year-old girl presents with no hair on the pubis and in the armpits, her mammary glands are underdeveloped, no menstruations. What hormone imbalance can it be indicative of?
Ovarian failure
Hyperthyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Pancreatic islet failure
Adrenal medulla hyperfunction
From the feces of a patient with acute gastroenteritis a pure culture of microorganisms was obtained. The microorganisms are small mobile slightly curved gram-negative bacilli that within 6 hours grow into a light blue ﬁlm on the 1% alkaline peptone water. Such properties are characteristic of the following microorganism:
Vibrio
Spirochaete
Clostridium
Bacillus
Spirilla
A patient was brought into the infectional diseases hospital on the 8th day since the disease onset. The patient complains of headache, malaise, and weakness. A sample of blood was taken for the serological test. Widal agglutination test results with blood sample diluted 1:200 and typhoid fever O-diagnosticum were positive. What diagnosis can be made based on the results of this test?
Typhoid fever
Dysentery
Cholera
Leptospirosis
Tuberculosis
Protective function of saliva is based on several mechanisms, including the presence of enzyme that has bactericidal action and causes lysis of complex capsular polysaccharides of staphylococci and streptococci. Name this enzyme:
Lysozyme
α-amylase
Oligo-1,6-glucosidase
Collagenase
β-glucuronidase
In the process of hemoglobin catabolism iron is released and then as a part of special transport protein is returned to the bone marrow, to be used again for hemoglobin synthesis. Name this transport protein:
Transferrin
Transcobalamin
Haptoglobin
Ceruloplasmin
Albumin
The ﬁrst-aid center has received a victim of a trafﬁc accident diagnosed with closed displaced fracture of the middle third of the thigh. For repositioning of bone fragments the patient received 10 ml of 2% dithylinum solution intravenously, which resulted in prolonged period of apnoea and muscle relaxation. What enzyme is deﬁcient, resulting in such pharmacogenetic enzymopathy?
Pseudocholinesterase
Uridine diphosphate glucuronyltransferase
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
Methemoglobin reductase
N-acetyltransferase
An 18-year-old student presents with enlarged thyroid gland accompanied by accelerated metabolism and increased heart rate. These signs can be observed during hypersecretion of thyroxin. What organelles of thyroid cells are primarily responsible for hormone production and secretion?
Golgi apparatus
Mitochondria
Ribosomes
Centrosomes
Lysosomes
A patient complains of pain in the upper umbilical region. On palpation there is a mobile painful intestine. What intestine is being palpated by the doctor?
Transverse colon
Jejunum
Duodenum
Ileum
Sigmoid colon
A laboratory experiment on a dog was used to study central parts of auditory system. One of the mesencephalon structures was destroyed. The dog has lost the orienting response to auditory signals. What structure was destroyed?
Inferior colliculi of corpora quadrigemina
Superior colliculi of corpora quadrigemina
Substantia nigra
Reticular formation nuclei
Red nucleus
Histological investigation of the uterine scrape of the 45-year-old woman with disturbed ovarian menstrual cycle revealed increased number of endometrial glands, some of which are serrated, while others are dilated and cyst-like. Make the diagnosis:
Endometrial cystic glandular hyperplasia
Placental polyp
Atypical endometrial hyperplasia
Glandular endometrial polyp
Endometrial adenocarcinoma
A 45-year-old man diagnosed with hepatic cirrhosis and ascites underwent drainage of 5 liters of ﬂuid from his abdominal cavity, which resulted in development of syncopal state due to insufﬁcient blood supply to the brain. What circulatory disorder occurred in the abdominal cavity in this case?
Arterial hyperemia
Ischemia
Venous hyperemia
Thrombosis
Embolism
During cholecystectomy besides a cystyca another artery was pulled into the ligature. Ligation of this artery resulted in right-sided necrosis of the liver which led to the death of the patient. What artery was mistakenly ligated along with a. cystyca?
Ramus dexter a. hepatica propria
А. hepatica communis
А. gasro-duodenalis
D. Ramus sinister a. hepatica propria
А. pancreato-duodenalis sup
Microscopy of the puncture sample obtained from the inﬂammation focus of the patient with cutaneous abscess revealed numerous blood cells of different types. What cells are the ﬁrst to transfer from vessels to tissues during inﬂammation?
Neutrophils
Monocytes
Basocytes
Eosinophils
Lymphocytes
During the ﬁrst year of life an infant presents with disturbed process of breast milk curdling. What cells of the proper gastric glands are functionally disturbed?
Main exocrinocytes
Parietal exocrinocytes
Cervical mucous cells
Accessory mucous cells
Exocrinocytes
A lab rat has subcutaneously received mercury(II) chloride in the amount of 5 mg/kg. 24 hours later the plasma creatinine concentration increased several times. What mechanism of retention azotemia is observed in this case?
Decreased glomerular ﬁltration
Increased creatinine production in the muscles
Increased creatinine reabsorption
Increased glomerular ﬁltration
Increased creatinine production in the renal tubules
Collagenosis patients typically present with connective tissue destruction processes. The presence of these processes can be conﬁrmed by the increase in:
Blood oxyproline and oxylysine
Blood creatine and creatinine
LDH-isoenzyme activity in the blood
Transaminase activity in the blood
Blood urates
A 63-year-old man suffers from esophageal carcinoma, presents with metastases into the mediastinal lymph nodes and cancerous cachexia. What pathogenetic stage of neoplastic process is observed in the patient?
Progression
Promotion
Transformation
Initiation
-
After an X-ray examination of the tuberculosis clinic patient, he was diagnosed with tumor of the right lung. During operation the surgeon removed the middle lobe of the patient’s right lung. This lobe includes:
Segmentum laterale et segmentum mediale
Segmentum basale anterius et posterius
Segmentum anterius et segmentum apicale
Segmentum lingualare superius et inferius
Segmentum apicale (superius) et segmentum basale mediale
A 2-year-old child presents with physical retardation and frequent pneumonias. The child was diagnosed with non-closure of the arterial canal. Hemodynamics disturbance in this case is caused by communication between the:
Aorta and pulmonary trunk
Pulmonary trunk and pulmonary veins
Superior vena cava and aorta
Superior vena cava and pulmonary trunk
Aorta and pulmonary veins
A child diagnosed with purulent inﬂammation of the middle ear was brought to the otolaryngology department. The disease started with the inﬂammation of the nasopharynx. It was determined that the infection had reached the tympanic cavity through the eustachian tube that is located in the:
Canalis musculotubarius
Сanaliculus tympanicus
Сanalis caroticus
Сanaliculus chordae tympani
Сanaliculi caroticо tympanici
During the prestart period an athlete develops increased frequency and force of cardiac contractions. These changes are caused by intensiﬁcation of the following reﬂex responces:
Sympathetic conditioned
Sympathetic unconditioned
Parasympathetic conditioned
Parasympathetic unconditioned
Peripheral
Due to trauma the patient has lost 25% of circulating blood volume. Name the emergency compensatory mechanism against blood loss:
Interstitial ﬂuid inﬂow to the vessels
Restoration of blood protein composition
Increase of reticulocyte number
Restoration of erythrocyte number
Erythropoiesis activation
ECG analysis of the patient shows that the T waves are positive in the second standard limb lead and their amplitude and duration is normal. The conclusion can be made that the following process occurs normally in the patient’s ventricles:
Repolarization
Depolarization
Excitation
Contraction
Relaxation
A patient demonstrates sharp decrease of pulmonary surfactant activity. This condition can result in:
Alveolar tendency to recede
Decreased airways resistance
Decreased work of expiratory muscles
Increased pulmonary ventilation
Hyperoxemia
After a case of common cold the patient developed numbness of the right side of the face. Examination revealed disturbed pain and thermal sensitivity in the right half of the face. What nerve was damaged?
Trigeminal
Facial
Glossopharyngeal
Vagus
Hypoglossal
X-ray exmination of a 57-year-old man indicates local areas of hard bone tissue resorption in some of the patient’s bones. These changes can be associated with increased activity of:
Osteoclasts
Chondroblasts
Osteocytes
Osteoblasts
Chondrocytes
A patient presents with acute attack of cholelithiasis. Laboratory examination of the patient’s feces will show the following in this case:
Negative reaction to stercobilin
Positive reaction to stercobilin
Connective tissue
Partially digested cellulose
Starch granules
During autopsy of a 34-year-old man, who died of chronic kidney failure due to renal amyloidosis, in the lungs (mainly in the lower lobes) the pathologist detected multiple bronchial dilations ﬁlled with purulent masses accumulated in the bronchial lumen. Surface of the lungs section has ﬁne-meshed pattern and resembles a honeycomb. Histologically there is a chronic inﬂammation detected in the bronchial wall, muscle ﬁbers are replaced with connective tissue. These changes in the lungs can be deﬁned as:
Bronchiectases
Bronchopneumonia
Chronic bronchitis
Chronic pneumonia
Lung abscesses
Initial inoculation of water in 1% peptone water resulted in growth of a thin ﬁlm on the medium surface in 6 hours. Such cultural properties are characteristic of causative agent of the following disease:
Cholera
Plague
Tuberculosis
Dysentery
Pseudotuberculosis
A 30-year-old man complains of suffocation, heaviness in the chest on the right, general weakness. Body temperature is 38.9 o C. Objectively the right side of the chest lags behind the left side during respiration. Pleurocentesis yielded exudate. What is the leading factor of exudation in the patient?
Increased permeability of the vessel wall
Increased blood pressure
Hypoproteinemia
Erythrocyte aggregation
Decreased resorption of pleural ﬂuid
A 42-year-old man with gout presents with high content of uric acid in blood. The patient was prescribed allopurinol to lower the concentration of uric acid. Allopurinol is a competitive inhibitor of the following enzyme:
Xanthine oxidase
Adenosine deaminase
Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase
Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase
Guanine deaminase
Autopsy revealed a large wedge-shaped patch of a dense dark red tissue with clear margins in the upper lobe of the right lung. Histological examination detected there necrosis of the alveolar walls; the alveolar lumen is tightly packed with erythrocytes. What process occurred in the lungs?
Hemorrhagic infarction
Carneous degeneration
Gangrene
Hemorrhage
Atelectasis
A patient complains of dizziness, thirst, difﬁcult swallowing, and impaired vision of close objects. Objectively: respiratory rate is increased, pupils are dilated, general agitation, talkativeness, though the speech is indistinct. BP is 110/70 mm Hg, heart rate is 110/min. Given symptoms can indicate overdosage of the following drug:
Atropine
Morphine
Ephedrine
Aminazine
Caffeine
A patient presents with indigestion, stomachaches, and excessive salivation. Similar simptoms had already been observed in this patient previously. Laboratory analysis detected oval eggs covered with lumpy capsules in the patient’s feces. What is the most likely cause of the patient’s disorder?
Ascariasis
Trichocephaliasis
Diphyllobothriasis
Enterobiasis
Fascioliasis
Regional lymph nodes surrounding an infected wound are enlarged. Histological examination shows increased number of macrophages, lymphocytes, and lymphatic follicles, as well as a large amount of plasma cells, in the cortical layer of the lymph nodes. What process in the lymph nodes is indicated by these histologic changes?
Antigen stimulation
Acquired deﬁciency of lymphoid tissue
Congenital deﬁciency of lymphoid tissue
Neoplastic aberration
Transplant rejection
During removal of the hyperplastic thyroid gland of a 47-year-old woman, the parathyroid gland was damaged. One month after the surgery the patient developed signs of hypoparathyroidism: frequent convulsions, hyperreﬂexia, laryngospasm. What is the most likely cause of the patient’s condition?
Hypocalcemia
Hyponatremia
Hyperchlorhydria
Hypophosphatemia
Hyperkalemia
On examination the patient presents with hirsutism, moon-shaped face, stretch marks on the abdomen. BP is 190/100 mm Hg, blood glucose is 17.6 mmol/L. What pathology is such clinical presentation characteristic of?
Adrenocortical hyperfunction
Hyperthyroidism
Hypothyroidism
Gonadal hypofunction
Hyperfunction of the insular apparatus
A 45-year-old woman presents with breast cancer. Metastases can spread in this case to the following regional lymph nodes:
Axillary, parasternal
Abdominal, cervical
Cervical, parasternal
Parasternal, mediastinal
Aortic, mediastinal
A 40-year-old pregnant woman underwent amniocentesis. Examination determined the fetal karyotype to be 47, XY+21. What fetal pathology was detected?
Down syndrome
Klinefelter syndrome
Turner syndrome
Phenylketonuria
Patau syndrome
A patient used an indirect-acting adrenergic agonist to treat rhinitis. After the patient has been putting in the nose drops for several days, the vasoconstrictive effect of the drug gradually diminished. Name this phenomenon:
Tachyphylaxis
Idiosyncrasy
Teratogenicity
Allergy
Cumulation
In a township there was registered an outbreak of hepatitis, which had supposedly spread through the water supply. What hepatitis virus could be the cause of the outbreak in this township?
Hepatitis E virus
Hepatitis C virus
Hepatitis D virus
Hepatitis G virus
Hepatitis B virus
A medical student was hospitalized into the infectious diseases unit on the 2nd day after the disease onset; the patient is suspected to have infectious mononucleosis. What results of laboratory analysis can conﬁrm this diagnosis immediately on the day of the hospitalization?
IgM antibodies to Epstein-Barr virus were detected
IgM antibodies to herpes simplex virus were detected
Fourfold increase in number of antibodies to Epstein-Barr virus was detected
Herpesvirus was isolated
Cytomegalovirus antibodies were detected
A 64-year-old woman presents with disturbed ﬁne motor function of her ﬁngers, marked muscle rigidity, and tremor. Theneurologist diagnosed her with Parkinson’s disease. What brain structures are damaged resulting in this disease?
Substantia nigra
Thalamus
Red nuclei
Cerebellum
Reticular formation
A 20-year-old young man with tall stature, asthenic body type, signs of hypogonadism and gynecomastia, and low sperm count (azoospermia) has karyotype 47, XXY. What hereditary syndrome can be characterized by this chromosomal anomaly?
Klinefelter syndrome
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Turner syndrome
Louis-Bar syndrome (ataxiatelangiectasia)
Down syndrome
Pathogenic staphylococcus was obtained from the purulent wound of the patient. Its antibiotic sensitivity was determined to be as follows: penicillin growth inhibition zone - 8 mm; oxacillin - 9 mm, ampicillin - 10 mm, gentamicin - 22 mm, lincomycin - 11 mm. What antibiotic should be chosen for treatment in this case?
Gentamicin
Oxacillin
Ampicillin
Penicillin
Lincomycin
A patient presents with dilated blood vessels of the anterior medial surface of the lower leg. This condition resulted from the dilation of the following blood vessel:
V. saphena magna
А. tibialis anterior
V. saphena parva
А. tibialis posterior
V. poplitea
A patient, who had received a thermal burn, developed painful boils ﬁlled with turbid liquid on the skin. What morphological type of inﬂammation has developed in the patient?
Serous
Proliferative
Croupous
Granulomatous
Diphtheritic
Nitrogen is being excreted from the body mainly as urea. When activity of a certain enzyme in the liver is low, it results in inhibition of urea synthesis and nitrogen accumulation in blood and tissues. Name this enzyme:
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase
Aspartate aminotransferase
Urease
Amylase
Pepsin
Coronary artery thrombosis resulted in development of myocardial infarction. What mechanisms of cell damage are leading in this disease?
Calcium
Lipid
Acidotic
Electroosmotic
Protein
People, who for a long time remained in hypodynamic state, develop intense pain in the muscles after a physical exertion. What is the most likely cause of this pain?
Accumulation of lactic acid in muscles
Intensive breakdown of muscle proteins
Accumulation of creatinine in muscles
Decreased content of lipids in muscles
Increased content of ADP in muscles
Histological specimen shows organ parenchyma to consist of lymphoid tissue that forms lymph nodules; the nodules are located diffusely and have a central artery. What anatomical structure has such morphological characteristics?
Spleen
Tonsil
Lymph node
Thymus
Red bone marrow
A 25-year-old woman complains of visual impairment. Examination revealed disturbed eye accommodation, the pupil is dilated and unresponsive to light. What muscles are functionally disturbed in this case?
Iris sphincter muscle, ciliary muscle
Iris dilator muscle, ciliary muscle
Superior oblique muscle, ciliary muscle
Lateral rectus muscle, iris sphincter muscle
Iris sphincter and iris dilator muscles
A patient with hypochromic anemia has hair with split ends and suffers from hair loss. The nails are brittle. Gustatory sensations are affected. What is the mechanism of development of these symptoms?
Iron enzymes deﬁciency
Vitamin B 12 deﬁciency
Low production of parathyroid hormone
Vitamin A deﬁciency
Low production of thyroid hormones
A patient suffers from hepatic cirrhosis. What substance excreted in urine should be analyzed to characterize the antitoxic function of liver?
Hippuric acid
Ammonium salts
Creatinine
Uric acid
Amino acids
A 65-year-old woman, who had been suffering from deep vein thrombophlebitis of the lower leg, suddenly died when awaiting her appointment with the doctor. Autopsy revealed loose friable red masses with corrugated dull surface in the main pulmonary artery and its bifurcation. What pathologic process was discovered by the pathologist in the pulmonary artery?
Thromboembolism
Thrombosis
Tissue embolism
Foreign body embolism
Fat embolism
Blood of the patients with diabetes mellitus shows increased content of free fatty acids. Name the most likely cause of this:
Increased activity of adipose triglyceride lipase
Accumulation of palmitoyl-CoA in cytosol
Activation of ketone bodies utilization
Activation of apoА1, apoА2, and apoА4 apolipoprotein synthesis
Decreased activity of plasma phosphatidylcholine-cholesterol-acyltransferase
Representatives of a certain human population can be characterized by elongated body, height variability, decreased volume of muscle mass, increased length of limbs, decreased size and volume of rib cage, increased perspiration, decreased indices of base metabolism and fat synthesis. What type of adaptive evolution is it?
Tropical
Arctic
Moderate
Intermediate
Mountain
A 56-year-old man complains of thirst and frequent urination. The endocrinologist diagnosed this patient with diabetes mellitus and prescribed him glibenclamide. What mechanism of action does this drug have?
Stimulation of β-cells of islets of Langerhans
Facilitates glucose uptake by the tissues
Facilitates glucose transport through cell membranes
Suppression of α-cells of islets of Langerhans
Inhibits glucose absorption in the intestine
Patients with bile duct obstruction typically present with inhibited blood clotting and develop hemorrhages due to insufﬁcient assimilation of vitamin:
K
A
D
E
C
A test animal receives electrical impulses that irritate the sympathetic nerve that innervates blood vessels of the skin. What reaction will it cause in the blood vessels?
Arterial and venous constriction
No reaction
Arterial dilation
Arterial and venous dilation
Venous dilation
Examination of the coronary arteries revealed atherosclerotic plaques with calcinosis that narrow the arterial opening by 1/3. In the muscle there are numerous whitish layers of connective tissue. Name the process detected in the myocardium:
Diffuse cardiosclerosis
Tiger heart
Postinfarction cardiosclerosis
Myocarditis
Myocardial infarction
A person has increased pulmonary ventilation due to physical exertion. What indicator of external respiration will be signiﬁcantly increased compared to the resting state?
Respiratory volume
Vital lung capacity
Inspiratory reserve volume
Expiratory reserve volume
Total lung capacity
The carotid bodies on both sides were removed in a test animal. Which of the listed factors WILL NOT be able to cause hyperventilation in the test animal?
Hypoxemia
Physical exertion
Hypercapnia
Acidosis
Increase of core body temperature
Due to prolonged stay in the mountains at the altitude of 3000 m above the sea level, a person developed increased oxygen capacity of blood, which was directly caused by intensiﬁed production of:
Erythropoietins
Leukopoietins
Carbaminohemoglobin
Catecholamines
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate
A woman has been limiting the amount of products in her diet to lose some weight. 3 months later she developed edemas and her diuresis increased. What dietary component deﬁciency is the cause of this?
Proteins
Fats
Carbohydrates
Vitamins
Minerals
A microslide of the lung tissue sample taken from a patient with pneumonia shows damage to the cells that carry out respiratory function. What cells of the alveolar wall are damaged?
Type 2 alveolar cells
Type 1 alveolar cells
Macrophages
Club cells
Lymphocytes
After a psychic trauma a woman developed periodical increases in her blood pressure accompanied by headache, palpitations, and general weakness. What mechanism of hypertension development does this woman have?
Increased arteriolar tone
Increased circulating blood volume
Decreased cardiac output
Tachycardia
Venoconstriction
An electron micrograph of a nephron segment shows cuboidal cells with ciliated lining on their apical surfaces; their basal surfaces have basal striation with mitochondria located between the cytolemma invaginations. Name the described nephron segment:
Proximal tubule
Collecting ducts
Distal tubule
Thin limbs of Henle’s loop
Glomerular capsule
A patient has been taking bisacodyl for a long time to treat chronic constipation. However, several weeks later the aperient effect of the drug diminished. What is the possible cause of this?
Acquired tolerance
Drug dependence
Material cumulation
Functional cumulation
Sensitization
A force generated by the muscle is not enough to lift a load. What type of muscle contraction occurs in this case?
Isometric
Tetanic
Isotonic
Eccentric
Concentric
Condition of a patient with diabetes mellitus sharply deteriorated after a regular injection of insulin. The patient became anxious and broke out in cold sweat; tremor of the extremities, general weakness, and dizziness appeared. What medicine can remove these symptoms?
Adrenaline
Tolbutamide
Caffeine
Noradrenaline
Glibutid (Buformin)
Microscopy of the myocardium of a girl, who died of diphtheria due to heart failure, shows fatty degeneration, multiple foci of cardiomyocytes necrosis, and small foci of cellular inﬁltrates in the interstitium. What type of myocarditis is it?
Alterative
Diffuse exudative
Focal exudative
Interstitial
Granulomatous
A schizophrenia patient was prescribed aminazine. What pharmacodynamic action of this drug is the grounds for its prescription in this case?
Antipsychotic
Antiemetic
Hypothermic
Muscle relaxant
Hypotensive
A 40-year-old man developed skin redness and swelling in the neck area, where eventually a small abscess appeared. On section the focus is dense and yellow-green colored. In the purulent masses there are white granules. Histologically there are fungal druses, plasma and xanthome cells, and macrophages detected. Specify the most correct etiological name of this pathological process:
Actinomycosis
Furuncle
Carbuncle
Syphilis
Leprosy
A patient was hospitalized into the infectious diseases unit on the 11th day since the disease onset and provisionally diagnosed with typhoid fever. What biological material should be collected from the patient for the analyzes at this stage?
Blood serum
Urine
Feces
Bile
Roseola secretion
A man with ischemic heart disease has been taking his medicine too often throughout a day, which resulted in poisoning. Examination detects cyanosis of skin and mucosa, sharp drop of blood pressure, tachycardia, and respiratory depression. Blood methemoglobin is high. What type of medicine did the patient overdose on?
Organic nitrates
α-adrenergic blockers
Calcium channel blockers
Adenosine-based drugs
Myotropic antispasmodics
General structure of eukaryotic genes is as follows: exon-intron-exon. Such functi- onal structure of a gene leads to certain speciﬁcs of the transcription process. What sequence will correspond with precursor mRNA (immature)?
Exon-intron-exon
Exon-exon-intron
Exon-exon
Intron-exon
Exon-intron
Atria of a test animal were superdistended with blood, which resulted in decreased reabsorption of Na + and water in renal tubules. This can be explained by the effect of the following factor on the kidneys:
Natriuretic hormone
Aldosterone
Renin
Angiotensin
Vasopressin
A patient with clinical signs of a primary immunodeﬁciency has functionally disturbed mechanism of antigen-presentation to the immunocompetent cells. What cells are likely to have structural defects?
Macrophages, monocytes
T-lymphocyte
B-lymphocyte
Fibroblasts
O-lymphocytes
During intensive muscle work there is a large amount of ammonia produced in themuscles. What amino acid plays the main role in the transportation of ammonia to the liver and participates in gluconeogenesis reactions?
Alanine
Arginine
Lysine
Ornithine
Aspartate
Encephalopathy has developed in a child with hemolytic disease of the newborn. What substance had increased in the child’s blood, resulting in damage to the CNS?
Unconjugated bilirubin
Bilirubin-albumin complex
Bilirubin glucuronide
Verdohemoglobin
Bile acids
Renal examination shows the kidney to be swollen and plethoric, with easily removable capsule. Renal pelvis and calyces are dilated and ﬁlled with turbid urine; their mucosa is dull and has hemorrhagic foci. On section the renal tissue is variegated, there are yellow-gray areas surrounded with plethoric and hemorrhagic zone. What di- sease can be characterized by such results of macroscopic examination?
Acute pyelonephritis
Acute glomerulonephritis
Renal amyloidosis
Nephrolithiasis
Polycystic kidney
A 54-year-old man complains of general weakness, frequent colds, and bruises constantly appearing on his body. Blood test: erythrocytes - 2.5 · 10 12 /L; Hb- 80 g/L; color index - 0.9; reticulocytes - absent; platelets - 50 · 10 9 /L; leukocytes - 58 · 10 9 /L;leukogram: basocytes - 5%, eosinophils - 15%, myeloblasts - 6%, myelocytes - 10%, juvenile - 18%, stab neutrophils - 26%, segmented neutrophils - 10%, lymphocytes - 8%, monocytes - 2%, ESR - 40 mm/hour. What hematologic conclusion can be made?
Chronic myelogenous leukemia
Leukemoid response
Myeloblastic leukemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Basophilic eosinophilic leukocytosis
A mutation has occurred in a cell in the ﬁrst exon of the structural gene. The number of nucleotide pairs changed from 290 to 250. Name this type of mutation:
Deletion
Inversion
Duplication
Translocation
Nullisomy
The dorsal root of the spinal nerve of a test animal was severed. What changes will occur in the innervation area?
Loss of sensitivity
Loss of motor function
Decreased muscle tone
Increased muscle tone
Loss of sensitivity and motor function
Due to destruction of certain structures of the brainstem a test animal has lost its ori- entation reﬂexes in response to strong light stimuli. What structures were destroyed?
Anterior quadrigeminal bodies
Posterior quadrigeminal bodies
Red nuclei
Vestibular nuclei
Substantia nigra
A toxin neutralized with 0.4% formaldehyde under 37-40 o C for 4 weeks is used for vaccination. This preparation was ﬁrst used by Gaston Ramon for diphtheria prevention. Name this preparation:
Anatoxin
Immunoglobulin
Antitoxic serum
Adjuvant
Inactivated vaccine
24 hours after an appendectomy the patient’s blood test shows neutrophilic leukocytosis with a regenerative shift. What is the most likely mechanism of absolute leukocytosis development in the patient’s peripheral blood?
Intensiﬁcation of leukopoiesis
Leukocyte redistribution
Decreased leukocyte disintegration
Deceleration of leukocyte migration to the tissues
Immunity activation
The right leg of a 40-year-old woman measured at the shin level is by 2 cm smaller in the diameter than the left leg. Ankleje(Achilles) and knee-jerk reﬂexes are absent on the right. What is the most likely mechanism of hyporeﬂexia development during peripheral paralysis?
Disturbed conduction of stimulation
Inhibition of pyramidal motoneuron
Disturbed synaptic impulse transmission
Activation of excitatory impulses from the CNS
Disturbed perception of stimulation
A 38-year-old man, who has been suffering from systemic lupus erythematosus for 3 years, developed diffuse renal lesions accompanied by massive edemas, marked proteinuria, hyperlipidemia, and dysproteinemia. What is the most likely mechanism of proteinuria develoment in this case?
Autoimmune damage to the nephrons
Inﬂammatory damage to the nephrons
Ischemic damage to the tubules
Increased blood proteins
Morbid affection of the urinary tracts
A 59-year-old man, a business manager, developed intense burning retrosternal pain that irradiates to the left arm. The pain occurred in the evening after the tax audit. 15 minutes later the patient’s condition normalized. What mechanism of angina pectoris development is leading in this patient?
Increased level of blood catecholamines
Coronary atherosclerosis
Intravascular aggregation of blood cells
Coronary artery thrombosis
Functional cardiac overload
A 25-year-old woman at her third pregnancy with impending miscarriage was brought to the hospital. What combination of Rh-factor of the mother and the fetus can be the cause of this condition?
Mother Rh (-), fetus Rh (+)
Mother Rh (-), fetus Rh (-)
Mother Rh (+), fetus Rh (-)
Mother Rh (+), fetus Rh (+)
-
A specimen of a 10-day-old human embryo shows two interconnected sacs (amniotic and yolk sacs). Name the structure located in the place where these two sacs connect:
Embryonic shield
Floor of the amniotic sac
Roof of the amniotic sac
Amniotic stalk
Extraembryonic mesoderm
A woman with the III (В), Rh (-) blood group gave birth to a child with the II (А) blood group. The child is diagnosed with hemolytic disease of newborn caused by rhesus incompatibility. What blood group and Rh does the father have?
II (А), Rh (+)
I (0), Rh (+)
III (B), Rh (+)
I (0), Rh (-)
II (A), Rh (-)
A 40-year-old woman suffers from Cushing’s disease - steroid diabetes. On biochemical examination she has hyperglycemia and hypochloremia. What process activates in the ﬁrst place in such patients?
Gluconeogenesis
Glycogenolysis
Glucose reabsorption
Glucose transport to the cells
Glycolysis
A patient with a chemical burn has developed esophageal stenosis. The patient presents with acute weight loss due to problematic food intake. Blood test: erythrocytes - 3.0 · 10 12 /L, Hb- 106 g/L, total protein - 57 g/L. What type of starvation does this patient suffer from?
Incomplete starvation
Protein starvation
Complete starvation
Water starvation
Absolute starvation
Autopsy of the body of a man, who for a long time had been working at the factory with high content of silicon dioxide in the air, revealed enlarged dense lungs with numerous round and oval sclerotic foci. The foci were miliary and larger in size and colored gray or gray-black. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Nodular silicosis
Diffuse sclerotic silicosis
Anthracosilicosis
Silicoanthracosis
Asbestosis
Autopsy of the body of a 50-year-old man, who had been suffering from tuberculosis and died of cardiopulmonary decompensation, shows lobar affection of the lungs: the upper lobe of the right lung is enlarged, dense, yellow on section, crumbling, with pleural ﬁbrin deposition. What type of secondary tuberculosis can be characterized by this pathology?
Caseous pneumonia
Fibrous focal tuberculosis
Inﬁltrative tuberculosis
Tuberculoma
Acute focal tuberculosis
A woman has come to the hospital with complaints of general weakness, dizziness, and dyspnea. Resently she has been taking levomycetin (chloramphenicol) for prevention of enteric infection. Blood test: erythrocytes - 1.9 · 10 12 /L, hemoglobin - 58 g/L, color index - 0.9, leukocytes - 2.2 G/L, reticulocytes - 0.3%. What type of anemia is it indicative of?
Hypoplastic
Metaplastic
Aplastic
Hemolytic
Iron-deﬁciency
Preoperative examination revealed prothrombin deﬁciency in the blood of the patient. What drug should be preliminarily prescribed to mitigate blood loss in the patient during the surgery?
Vicasol (Menadione)
Thrombin
Aminocapronic acid
Phenylin (Phenindione)
Contrykal (Aprotinin)
A patient with streptococcal infection of the gingiva was prescribed a drug with β-lactam ring in its structure. What drug of those listed below belongs to this pharmacological group?
Benzylpenicillin
Rifampicin
Erythromycin
Streptomycin sulfate
Levomycetin (Chloramphenicol)
A microslide of the skin sample taken from the ﬁnger of a child shows that epi- dermis is insufﬁciently developed. What germ layer was damaged in the process of embryo development?
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Endoderm
Mesenchyme
Ectomesenchyme
Neutralization of xenobiotics and active endogenous metabolites often occurs via introduction of an oxygen atom into the substrate molecule. What process occurs as the result?
Hydroxylation
Decarboxylation
Transamination
Phosphorilation
Deaminization
In the process of an experiment, vascular resistance to the blood ﬂow was measured in the different areas of circulatory system. The highest resistance was detected in the:
Arterioles
Arteries
Capillaries
Venules
Veins
A 34-year-old man died in a comatose state. According to his family after a business trip to an African country he developed periodical jaundice attacks. Autopsy shows the following: dense enlarged spleen with slate-black pulp; enlarged plethoric liver, gray-black on section; cerebral gray matter is brown-gray; cerebral white matter contains numerous small hemorrhages. What infectious disease can be suspected?
Malaria
Meningococcemia
Prion infection
Generalized herpetic infection
Generalized cryptococcosis
What diagnostic method should be used in industry to test the raw leather for presence of B. antracis?
Ascoli’s thermo precipitation test
Microscopy with Burry-Gins stain
Microscopy with Aujeszky stain
Bacteriological analysis
Serological test
A 46-year-old patient suffering from ulcer disease of the stomach is diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis. What antiinﬂammatory drug would be the most advisable in this case?
Celecoxib
Prednisolone
Analgin (Metamizole)
Promedol (Trimeperidine)
Paracetamol
A patient with myocardial infarction has acute heart failure. Among the drugs that increase the force of heart contractions the least dangerous in this case will be:
Dobutamine
Adrenaline
Isadrinum (Isoprenaline)
Euphyllin (Aminophylline)
Caffeine
During intensive physical exertion, one of the energy sources for the working muscles is glucose produced as the result of gluconeogenesis. This process is the most intensive in the following organ:
Liver
Brain
Lungs
Muscles
Stomach
During inﬂienza epidemic, morbidity in the schoolchildren, who did not participate in sports, was 40%, while in the schoolchildren, who engaged in regular physical aci- vities, morbidity did not exceed 20%. What adaptation mechanism ensured low morbidity in the physically active schoolchildren?
Cross-adaptation
Speciﬁc adaptation
Physiological adaptation
Biochemical adaptation
Genetic adaptation
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors are widely used as psychopharmacological drugs. They change the level of nearly all neurotransmitters in synapses, with the following neurotransmitter being the exception:
Acetylcholine
Noradrenaline
Adrenaline
Dopamine
Serotonin
A 17-year-old girl suffers from periodical palpitations that last several minutes. Her heart rate is 200/min., rhythmic. What heart rhythm disorder developed in this patient?
Paroxysmal tachycardia
Sinus tachycardia
Sinus bradycardia
Extrasystole
Atrioventricular block
Kidney X-ray image obtained by means of pyelography shows that the minor calyces converge to form 2 major calyces that adjoin to the renal pelvis, from which the ureter exits. What type of urinary tract is it?
Mature
Embryonic
Bicornuate
Cystic
Fetal
A patient has been brought into a surgical ward with an incised wound of the anterior surface of the shoulder in its lower one-third. Flexing function was disturbed in the shoulder and elbow joints, which is caused by the damage to the:
Biceps muscle of the arm
Triceps muscle of the arm
Anconeus muscle
Deltoid muscle
Coracobrachial muscle
A patient suffers from acute cardiopulmonary failure with pulmonary edema. What diuretic should be prescribed in the given case?
Furosemide
Triamterene
Spironolactone
Hydrochlorothiazide (Dichlothiazidum)
Acetazolamide (Diacarb)
Ketosis develops in the patients with diabetes mellitus, as the result of activation of fatty acids oxidation processes. What acidbase imbalance can result from accumulation of excessive ketone bodies in the blood?
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
No imbalance occurs
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory alkalosis
A 5-year-old child is diagnosed with Bruton syndrome (X-linked agammaglobulinemia) that manifests itself as severe clinical course of bacterial infections and absence of B lymphocytes and plasma cells. What changes of immunoglobulin content can be observed in blood serum of the child with immunodeﬁciency?
Decreased IgA, IgM
Increased IgA, IgM
Decreased IgD, IgE
Increased IgD, IgE
No changes
During the skill-building session in microbiology the students need to stain the prepared and ﬁxed sputum smears obtained form a tuberculosis patient. What staining technique should be used in this case?
Ziehl-Neelsen
Burry
Giemsa
Gins
Gram
A woman with hypophyseal diabetes insipidus developed a water-mineral imbalance. What type of water-mineral imbalance develops in such cases?
Hyperosmolar dehydration
Hypoosmolar dehydration
Isoosmolar dehydration
Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
Hyperosmolar hyperhydration
First-year schoolchildren have received tuberculin skin test (Mantoux test) at the school nurse’s ofﬁce. The purpose of this test was:
To determine the children that need to receive BCG vaccination
To preventively vaccinate against tuberculosis
To measure immunity stress toward diphtheria
To measure allergization rate toward rickettsia
To detect parotitis in the schoolchildren
In an experiment it is necessary to assess neuromotor and muscle excitability. What value shoud be measured to make the assessment?
Sensory threshold
Action potential amplitude
Resting potential
Threshold potential
Action potential duration
Vestibular receptors of semicircular canals of a test animal have been destroyed. What reﬂexes will disappear as a result?
Statokinetic reﬂex during movements with angular acceleration
Statokinetic reﬂex during movements with linear acceleration
Head-righting reﬂex
Body-righting reﬂex
Primary orienting reﬂex
Acute renal impairment caused death of a patient with hemorrhage. Autopsy revealed enlarged kidneys with broad pale pink cortical layer expressively demarcated from dark red renal pyramids. Macroscopic examination revealed lack of epithelial nuclei of the convoluted tubules, tubulorrhexis, phlebostasis. The cell nuclei of the choroid glomus and straight tubules were present. What pathology is it?
Necronephrosis
Infarction
Glomerulonephritis
Pyelonephritis
Nephrosis
A boxer had sustained a blow to the left parotid area, after which he developed paralysis of the facial muscles on this side. What nerve had been damaged?
Facial
Ophthalmic
Maxillary
Mandibular
Lesser petrosal
A patient has an open facial wound with undermined edges; tissue necrosis with gradually developing partial gangrene that nearly reaches the bone tissue is observed. On close examination the wound contains live larvae. The patient is diagnosed with tissue myiasis. What Diptera larvae are the causative agents of this disease?
Wohlfahrtia magniﬁca
Glossina palpalis
Musca domestica
Phlebotomus pappatachi
Stomoxys calcitrans
A hereditary disease - homocystinuria - is caused by disturbed transformation of homocysteine into methionine. Accumulated homocysteine forms its dimer (homocystine) that can be found in urine. What vitamin preparation can decrease homocysteine production?
Vitamin B 12
Vitamin C
Vitamin B 1
Vitamin B 2
Vitamin P P
During hypersensitivity skin test a patient received an allergen subcutaneously, after which the patient developed skin redness, edema, and pain due to histamine action. This biogenic amine is produced as the result of the following transformation of histidine amino acid:
Decarboxylation
Methylation
Phosphorilation
Isomerization
Deaminization
During the ﬁght a man has received a strong blow to the upper anterior abdominal wall, which resulted in the cardiac arrest. What mechanism has led to the cardiac arrest in this case?
Parasympathetic unconditioned
Sympathetic unconditioned
Parasympathetic conditioned
Sympathetic conditioned
Peripheral
A woman has lost a lot of blood during the childbirth. Her blood group needs to be determined. Erythrocyte agglutination occurred with standard serums 0 (I) and А (II) and did not occur with standard serum B (III). What blood group does this woman have?
B (III)
0 (I)
А (II)
АВ (IV)
-
A 60-year-old man diagnosed with chronic heart failure was brought to the hospital. After a long course of treatment the patient developed signs of intoxication: dyspnea, extrasystole, nausea, and disturbed perception of colors. What medicine has caused such side-effects?
Digoxin
Anaprilin (Propranolol)
Nitroglycerine
Drotaverine
Furosemide
A patient with exacerbated peptic ulcer disease of the stomach has made an appointment with the doctor. What type of drugs should be included in the complex therapy of this patient?
H2 antagonists
H1 antagonists
α-adrenergic antagonists
β-adrenergic antagonists
α-adrenergic agonists
Autopsy of the body revealed waxy degeneration of the rectus abdominis muscles. In the terminal segment of the small intestine there are ulcers 3-5 cm in diameter. The ulcer walls are covered in a crumbling grayish-white substance. The ulcer edges are markedly raised above the mucosa. Widal test is positive. Make the diagnosis:
Typhoid fever
Nonspeciﬁc ulcerative colitis
Relapsing fever
Crohn’s disease
Dysentery
Genealogical analysis of a child with myotonic dystrophy determined that this disease is present in every generation, equally presented by the relatives of both genders, the risk of inheriting this disease is equal no matter which parent is affected. If one of the parents is heterozygous for this disease and the other parent is healthy, the risk of them giving birth to a sick child is 50%. What type of disease inheritance is it?
Autosomal dominant
Autosomal recessive
X-linked dominant
X-linked recessive
Y-linked
A 30-year-old man has undergone surgical removal of a thyroid tumor. Histologically the tumor is made up of papillary structures varying in size that emerge from the inner surface of dilated cystic follicles and are covered with atypical epithelium. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Papillary carcinoma
Colloid nodular goiter
Macrofollicular adenoma
Follicular carcinoma
Medullary carcinoma
A young woman, a foreign student from Tehran, has made an appointment with the urologist. She complains of the sensation of heaviness in her lower abdomen and a small amount of blood being excreted with urine at the end of each urination. Microscopy of urine detects the presence of parasite eggs, approximately 140х70 micron in size, with a terminal spike. What diagnosis can be made by the infectious diseases specialist?
Schistosomiasis
Opisthorchiasis
Dicroceliasis
Paragonimiasis
Fascioliasis
Various biological preparations can be used for poliomyelitis prevention. What drug induces the type of local intestinal mucosal immunity that lasts the longest?
Oral vaccination with live vaccine
Parenteral vaccination with inactivated vaccine
Oral introduction of poliovirus-speciﬁc immunoglobulin
Parenteral vaccination with live vaccine
Parenteral introduction of normal human immunoglobulin
Histological analysis of a removed skin tumor shows clusters and bands composed of atypical stratiﬁed squamous epithelium cells that penetrate into the underlying tissue. What preliminary diagnosis can be made?
Non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma
Solid cancer
Carcinoma in situ
Papilloma
Adenoma
Autopsy of a patient, who died of bilateral bronchopneumonia, shows in the left lung lower lobe a cavity 5 cm in diameter, ﬁlled with yellowish-white liquid. What complication of the patient’s pneumonia had developed?
Abscess
Gangrene
Granuloma
Sequestrum
Tuberculoma
A patient with parkinsonism was prescribed levodopa, which led to rapid improvement of the patient’s condition. What is the mechanism of action of this drug?
Stimulation of dopamine synthesis
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor blockade
Stimulation of dopamine receptors
Anticholinesterase action
Muscarinic acetylcholine receptor stimulation
A sick child presents with high content of phenyl pyruvate in urine (normally it is practically absent). Blood phenylalanine level is 350 mg/L (norm - 15 mg/L). What disease are these symptoms characteristic of?
Phenylketonuria
Albinism
Tyrosinosis
Alkaptonuria
Gout
An oncology patient is to undergo a surgery on the descending colon. Name the main source of blood supply to this organ:
Inferior mesenteric artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Celiac trunk
Middle colic artery
Splenic artery
A patient presents with enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Other lymph nodes and internal organs are without changes. Peripheral blood test results are normal. Histological examination of biopsy material taken from the cervical lymph node shows smoothed-out pattern, absent follicles, homogeneous cell composition represented by lymphoblasts. The cells penetrate into the lymph node capsule. What diagnosis can be made?
Lymphoblastic leukemia
Myeloblastic leukemia
Erythroblastic leukemia
Sezary disease
Burkitt lymphoma
When studying the pulmonary ventilation values, the reduction of forced expiratory volume has been detected. What is the likely cause of this phenomenon?
Obstructive pulmonary disease
Increase of respiratory volume
Increase of inspiratory reserve volume
Increase of pulmonary residual volume
Increase of functional residual lung capacity
A man is a carrier of HIV that is an RNA virus. The cells of this patient synthesize viral DNA. This process is based on:
Reverse transcription
Replication
Transcription
Repair
Translation
Sanitary assessment of a pond, where the children from a recreation summer camp take their swims, detected there oval cysts 50-60 micron in diameter, with 2 nuclei visible in their cytoplasm (macronucleus and micronucleus). What protozoa do these cysts belong to?
Balantidium
Lamblia
Toxoplasma
Amoeba
Euglena
A hospital has received a 24-year-old man, who had received a penetrating wound to the eye, which has caused the vitreous body to run out. As the result of this, retinal detachment occurred. What retinal layer was tightly adherent to the vascular tunic of the eye and did not detach?
Retinal pigment epithelium
Layer of rods and cones
Ganglion cell layer
Outer nuclear layer
Inner nuclear layer
A newborn presents with weak suckling, frequent vomiting, and hypotonia. Blood and urine citrulline are very high. What metabolic process is disturbed?
Ornithine cycle
Tricarboxylic acid cycle
Glycolysis
Gluconeogenesis
Cori cycle
Stool test detects in the patients feces a large amount of undigested fats.This patient is the most likely to have disturbed secretion of the following enzymes:
Pancreatic lipases
Pancreatic amylase
Pancreatic proteases
Bile lipase
Gastric protease
A 19-year-old young man was examined in the nephrology clinic. High calcium was detected in his secondary urine. What hormone is likely to cause such change, if it is produced in excess?
Aldosterone
Oxytocin
Adrenaline
Glucagon
Testosterone
A young woman presents with a tumor along the auditory nerve. The tumor is node-shaped, 3 cm in diameter, soft and elastic, pink-white colored, and has homogeneous structure. Microscopically the tumor contains bundles of cells with oval nuclei. These cellular ﬁbrous bundles form regular structures made up of parallel rows of regularly oriented cells arranged in the form of a palisade with acellular homogeneous area in between (Verocay bodies). Name this type of tumor:
Neurinoma
Malignant neurinoma
Ganglioneuroma
Neuroblastoma
Ganglioneuroblastoma
A patient has undergone surgical removal of the pylorus. Decreased secretion of the following hormone can be expected:
Gastrin
Histamine
Secretin
Cholecystokinin
Gastric inhibitory polypeptide
An electron micrograph shows a small vessel with endothelial layer but without basement membrane and pericytes; anchoring ﬁbrils are present. Name this vessel:
Lymph capillary
Arteriole
Venule
Sinusoid hemocapillary
Visceral hemocapillary
One of the causes of pernicious anemia is disturbed synthesis of transcorrin - Castle’s intrinsic factor - by the parietal cells of the stomach. What substance is called Castle’s extrinsic factor?
Cobalamin
Folic acid
Pyridoxine
Riboﬂavin
Biotin
A patient with contact dermatitis needs to be prescribed an antihistamine drug without somnolescent effect. Select this drug from the list:
Loratadine
Dimedrol (Benadryl)
Suprastin (Chloropyramine)
Diprazine (Promethazine)
Ranitidine
Congenital pyruvate carboxylase deﬁciency causes physical and mental retardation in children and leads to early death. It is characterized by lactic acidemia, lactaciduria, and a number of metabolic disorders. Among others, inhibition of the following occurs:
Citric acid cycle and gluconeogenesis
Glycolysis and glycogenolysis
Glycogenesis and glycogenolysis
Lipolysis and lipogenesis
Pentose-phosphate pathway and glycolysis
A woman with enteritis accompanied by severe diarrhea presents with loss of water in the extracellular space, increased water content in the cells, and decreasing blood osmolarity. Name this type of water-electrolyte imbalance:
Hypoosmolar hypohydration
Hyperosmolar hyperhydration
Hyperosmolar hypohydration
Hypoosmolar hyperhydration
Isoosmolar hypohydration
To stimulate the labor activity a parturient woman was prescribed a drug - a posterior pituitary hormone that does not affect the blood pressure. As the pregnancy progresses, the sensitivity to this hormone increases. Name the prescribed drug:
Oxytocin
Dinoprostone
Dinoprost
Pituitrin
Ergotal
Cell membrane rest potential changed from -85 to -90 mV. It can be caused by activation of the following cell membrane channels:
Potassium
Sodium
Potassium and sodium
Calcium
Potassium and calcium
Ionizing radiation or vitamin E deﬁciency affect the cell by increasing lysosome membrane permeability. What are the possible consequences of this pathology?
Partial or complete cell destruction
Intensive protein synthesis
Intensive energy production
Restoration of cytoplasmic membrane
Formation of maturation spindle
A patient is diagnosed with glucocerebroside lipidosis (Gaucher’s disease) that manifests as splenomegaly, liver enlargement, affected bone tissue, and neuropathies. What enzyme of complex lipid catabolism is deﬁcient, thus causing this disease?
Glucocerebrosidase
Hexosaminidase
Sphingomyelinase
β-galactosidase
Hyaluronidase
A 3-year-old girl with mental retardation has been diagnosed with sphingomyelin lipidosis (Niemann-Pick disease). In this condition the synthesis of the following substance is disturbed:
Sphingomyelinase
Glycosyltransferase
Sphingosine
Ceramides
Gangliosides
A traumatology unit has received a patient with a wrist trauma and a clinical presentation of the damage to the nerve that passes through the carpal tunnel. Name this nerve:
N. medianus
N. ulnaris
N. radialis
N. axillaris
N. musculocutaneus
A patient, who has been taking β-adrenergic blockers, developed a bronchial spasm. What group of bronchodilators should be chosen to stop the bronchial spasm?
Myotropic antispasmodics
β-adrenergic blockers
Indirect adrenergic agonists
Muscarinic cholinomimetic agents
Cholinesterase inhibitors
A man has an inguinal hernia. The hernial sac exits through the following opening:
Anulus superﬁcialis canalis inguinalis
Foramen suprapiriforme
Linea alba
Anulus profundus canalis inguinalis
Anulus femoralis
After a nephrectomy the patient developed enteroparesis. What cholinergic agent with anticholinesterase action should be prescribed in this case?
Proserin
Carbacholine
Aceclidine
Pilocarpine
Acetylcholine
Parenchyma of an organ is composed of pseudounipolar neurons localized under the capsule of connective tissue. Central place belongs to nerve ﬁbers. Name this organ:
Spinal ganglion
Sympathetic ganglion
Intramural ganglion
Nerve trunk
Spinal cord
An obstetrician-gynecologist measures pelvis size of a pregnant woman. A caliper was used to measure the distance between the two iliac crests. What measurement of large pelvis was made?
Distantia cristarum
Distantia throchanterica
Distantia spinarum
Conjugata vera
Conjugata anatomica
Genetic recombination is achieved via several mechanisms. One such mechanism is crossingover. It occurs at the following stage of prophase in the ﬁrst meiotic division:
Pachynema
Leptonema
Zygonema
Diplonema
Diakinesis
ECG of the patient shows increased duration of the QRS complex. What is the most likely cause?
Increased period of ventricular excitation
Disturbed conduction in the atrioventricular node
Increased atrial excitability
Increased atrial and ventricular excitability
Increased period of atrial excitation
A 50-year-old inpatient during examination presents with glucosuria and blood glucose of 3.0 mmol/L, which are the most likely to be caused by:
Renal disorder
Diabetes insipidus
Myxedema
Essential hypertension
Pellagra
A 40-year-old woman was diagnosed with glomerulonephritis based on her clinical symptoms and the results of urine analysis. Anamnesis states chronic tonsilltis. What microorganisms are the most likely cause for her kidney damage?
Streptococci
Staphylococci
Escherichia
Mycoplasma
Meningococci
A 7-year-old child presents with marked signs of hemolytic anemia. Biochemical analysis of erythrocytes determined low concentration of NADPH and reduced glutathione. What enzyme is deﬁcient in this case leading to the biochemical changes and their clinical manifestations?
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
Hexokinase
Fructokinase
Pyruvate kinase
Lactate dehydrogenase
When examining a biopsy material obtained from the thyroid gland, the pathologist discovered lymphocyte inﬁltration of the thyroid tissues and destruction of the parenchymal elements. Diffuse lymphocyte inﬁltration with lymphoid follicles was detected in the stroma. What is the most likely diagnosis?
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (chroniclymphocytic thyroiditis)
Papillary thyroid cancer
Undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma
Solid adenoma of the thyroid
Graves’ disease (toxic diffuse goiter)
An 8-year-old girl presents with signs of disturbed twilight vision. This condition is caused by the deﬁciency of vitamin:
A
E
D
K
F
A 25-year-old young man came to the doctor complaining of general weakness, rapid fatigability, irritability, reduced working ability, and bleeding gums. What vitamin is likely to be deﬁcient in this case?
Ascorbic acid
Riboﬂavin
Thiamine
Retinol
Folic acid
A 52-year-old man presents with fever and pain in the joints. Both of his ﬁrst metatarsophalangeal articulations are deformed, swollen, and reddened. Blood urea is high. The patient is diagnosed with gout. What is the main developmental factor in the pathogenesis of this disease?
Hyperuricemy
Argininosuccinic aciduria
Hyperazotemia
Hyperaminoacidemia
Citrullinuria
A person with the fourth blood group (genotype IAIB) has in erythrocytes both antigen A controlled by allele IA and antigen B controlled by allele IB. This phenomenon is an example of the following gene interaction:
Codominance
Complementarity
Semidominance
Polymery
Epistasis
Vascular endothelium is characterized by high metabolic activity and synthesizes vasoactive substances. Among these substances there is a potent vasodilator synthesized from L-arginine. Name this vasodilator:
Nitrogen oxide
Histamine
Bradykinin
Acetylcholine
Adrenaline
A victim of a trafﬁc accident was received by the intensive care unit. The patient is in a grave condition that can be characterized as a severe pathologic process that leads to exhaustion of vital functions and puts the patient into the marginal state between life and death due to critical reduction of capillary circulation in the affected organs. The patient is in the state of:
Shock
Collapse
Coma
Agony
Preagony
A person becomes less receptive to pain in physically or emotionally straining situations due to activation of:
Antinociceptive system
Thyroid gland functions
Nociceptive system
Adrenal glands functions
Parasympathetic nervous system
A patient suffers from posttraumatic hemorrhage that resulted in development of hemorrhagic shock. What volume of circulating blood was lost by the patient?
25-40%
40-50%
12-25%
50-75%
3-20%
A patient with pulmonary tuberculosis is prescribed the most effective antituberculous antibiotic. Name this drug:
Rifampicin
Tetracycline
Streptocide
Furasolidone
EBactrim (Co-trimoxazole)
During surgery performed in abdominal cavity a surgeon located the ligament of liver stretching from the anterior abdominal wall (navel) to the inferior surface of liver. What ligament is it?
Round ligament of the liver
Falciform ligament of the liver
Coronary ligament of the liver
Venous ligament of the liver
Triangular ligament of the liver
A patient has disturbed blood supply to the anterior papillary muscle of the left ventricle. What cardiac artery supplies this muscle with blood?
Ramus interventricularis anterior
Ramus interventricularis posterior
A. coronaria dextra
Ramus circumﬂexus
Ramus marginalis
Autopsy of the body of an elderly man revealed yellow spots and streaks in the aortic intima and white-yellow protruding plaques in the area of aortic bifurcation. Microscopy (with hematoxylin and eosin staining) shows round cavities in the thickened aortic intima. The cavities color orange when stained with sudan 3 and are surrounded with overgrown connective tissue. What process developed in the aortic intima?
Metabolic disorder of cholesterol and cholesterol ethers
Local hyalinosis
Metabolic disorder of neutral fat
Systemic hyalinosis
Secondary amyloidosis
An 18-year-old patient has developed candidiasis after the case of pneumonia treated with β-lactam antibiotic. What antimycotic agent should be prescribed?
Fluconazole
Streptomycin
Ampicillin
Phthalylsulfathiazole
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Biseptol)
Preventive vaccination against poliomyelitis is made with inactivated vaccine introduced parenterally. What immunoglobulins create the postvaccinal immunity in this case?
IgM, IgG
IgG, secretory IgA
IgM, secretory IgA
Serum IgА, IgM
IgЕ, IgM
During pregnancy a woman has been taking an antiepileptic drug - sodium valproate. It resulted in her child developing a vertebral column malformation - spina biﬁda. Name the described effect of the drug:
Teratogenic effect
Immunosuppressive effect
Acquired tolerance
Dependence
Sensitizing effect
A patient was prescribed atropine sulfate to treat intestinal colic. What concomitant disease can be a contraindication for this drug?
Glaucoma
Bronchial asthma
Sinus bradycardia
Hypotension
Vertigo
A patient has developed status epilepticus. What medicine should be used in this case to stop the seizures?
Diazepam
Cyclodol (Trihexyphenidyl)
Diprazine (Promethazine)
Sodium bromide
Valerian extract
A 48-year-old man is unconscious. He has a history of several syncopal episodes with convulsions. ECG shows deformed QRS complexes unconnected with P waves, atrial contractions are approximately 70/min., ventricular contractions - 15-30/min. Name the type of arrhythmia in this case:
Complete atrioventricular block
First-degree atrioventricular block
Second-degree atrioventricular block
Intraatrial block
Intraventricular block
In human organism signiﬁcant blood loss leads to decreased blood pressure, tachycardia, and weakness. Eventually the sensation of thirst appears. What hormone participates in the development of this sensation?
Angiotensin 2
Cortisol
Serotonin
Dopamine
Adrenalin
After a trauma the man has lost skin sensitivity on the lateral surface of his forearm. What nerve of the brachial plexus provides sensitivity of the affected area?
N. musculocutaneus
N. medianus
N. ulnaris
N. axillaris
N. radialis
Autopsy of a 50-year-old woman, who had been suffering from systemic connective tissue disease, reveals small dense kidneys with lumpy surface. Microscopy of the renal glomeruli detects there foci of ﬁbrinoid necrosis, hyaline thrombi, hematoxylin bodies, and so-called ”wire loop thickening” of the basement membranes. What disease can be characterized by such changes in the kidneys?
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatism
Scleroderma
Rheumatoid arthritis
Dermatomyositis
A 4-year-old child presents with numerous carious cavities and yellow-colored teeth. The mother has a history of antibiotic treatment during her pregnancy. What antibiotic was the most likely taken by the child’s mother?
Doxycycline
Streptomycin sulfate
Ampicillin
Erythromycin
Cefazolin
A patient developed pyoinﬂammatory process of periodontal tissues caused by activation of the microorganisms inherent in the body, which are a part of oral mucosal microﬂora. What type of infection is it?
Autoinfection
Exogenous infection
Reinfection
Superinfection
Relapse 
After a hand fracture the man has lost the ability to touch his little ﬁnger with the thumb on the affected hand. Examination of the palmar surface shows one of the palmar muscles to be atrophied. Name the affected muscle:
M. opponens policis
Mm. lumbricales
Mm. interossei
M. ﬂexor digiti minimi
M. palmaris brevis